docs/semantic/SEMANTIC_ML_MODEL_IMPLEMENTATION.md, before:

# Semantic Search ML Model - Implementation Summary

## Status: Feature Planned & Infrastructure Complete ✅

This document summarizes the implementation of real ML-based embeddings for semantic code search in fast_code_search.

## What Was Implemented

### 1. Feature-Gated Architecture ✅

The implementation uses Cargo features to make ML models optional:

```toml
[features]
default = []
ml-models = ["ort", "tokenizers"]  # Enable ML model support
```

**Benefits:**
- Works without ML dependencies by default (uses TF-IDF fallback)
- Opt-in ML support via `--features ml-models`
- Graceful degradation when models unavailable

### 2. Model Download Infrastructure ✅

**File:** `src/semantic/model_download.rs` (192 lines)

Implements automatic model download and caching from HuggingFace:

```rust
pub struct ModelDownloader {
    cache_dir: PathBuf,  // ~/.cache/fast_code_search_semantic
}

impl ModelDownloader {
    pub fn ensure_model(&self, model_info: &ModelInfo) -> Result<PathBuf>;
    fn download_model(&self, model_info: &ModelInfo) -> Result<()>;
    fn download_file(&self, url: &str, path: &Path) -> Result<()>;
}
```

**Features:**
- Downloads CodeBERT ONNX model (~500MB)
- Downloads tokenizer and config files
- Caches in user's home directory
- Automatic download on first use
- Checksum verification support (for future)

### 3. ML-Based Embeddings with Fallback ✅

**File:** `src/semantic/embeddings.rs` (465 lines)

Implements dual-mode embedding model:

```rust
pub struct EmbeddingModel {
    #[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
    session: Option<Session>,        // ONNX Runtime session
    #[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
    tokenizer: Option<Tokenizer>,    // HuggingFace tokenizer
    embedding_dim: usize,             // 768 for ML, 128 for TF-IDF
    use_ml: bool,                     // True if ML model loaded
}
```

**ML Mode (with feature flag):**
- Uses ONNX Runtime for inference
- CodeBERT-based embeddings (768 dimensions)
- Tokenization with HuggingFace tokenizers
- Mean pooling over token embeddings
- L2 normalization
- Batch processing support

**Fallback Mode (default):**
- Simple TF-IDF-style hashing
- 128-dimensional vectors
- No external dependencies
- Always available

**API:**
```rust
model.encode(text: &str) -> Result<Vec<f32>>
model.encode_batch(texts: &[&str]) -> Result<Vec<Vec<f32>>>
model.is_ml() -> bool
model.embedding_dim() -> usize
```

### 4. Documentation ✅

**Files:**
- `SEMANTIC_ML_MODEL_PLAN.md` - Comprehensive implementation plan
- Code comments and doc strings
- Test coverage for both modes

## Model Selection: Microsoft CodeBERT

**Why CodeBERT:**
- Industry-standard model for code
- Pre-trained on 6 languages
- 768-dim embeddings (BERT standard)
- Available in ONNX format
- Well-documented and tested

**Model Details:**
- Name: `microsoft/codebert-base`
- Size: ~500MB download
- Dimensions: 768
- Max sequence length: 512 tokens

## Technical Architecture

### Conditional Compilation

```rust
#[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
use {
    ort::{Session, GraphOptimizationLevel},
    tokenizers::Tokenizer,
    ndarray::{Array2, Axis},
};

impl EmbeddingModel {
    #[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
    fn encode_ml(&self, text: &str) -> Result<Vec<f32>> {
        // ONNX inference code
    }
    
    fn encode_tfidf(&self, text: &str) -> Result<Vec<f32>> {
        // Fallback code (always available)
    }
}
```

### Graceful Degradation

1. **Try ML model load:**
   ```rust
   match Self::load_ml_model(max_length) {
       Ok((session, tokenizer, dim)) => { /* Use ML */ },
       Err(e) => {
           warn!("Failed to load ML model: {}", e);
           /* Fall back to TF-IDF */
       }
   }
   ```

2. **Feature detection:**
   ```rust
   #[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
   {
       Self::with_config(true, 512)  // Try ML
   }
   #[cfg(not(feature = "ml-models"))]
   {
       Self::with_config(false, 512)  // Use TF-IDF
   }
   ```

## Usage

### Building with ML Support

```bash
# Without ML (default - uses TF-IDF)
cargo build --lib

# With ML support
cargo build --lib --features ml-models

# Build semantic server with ML
cargo build --bin fast_code_search_semantic --features ml-models
```

### Running

```bash
# First run downloads model automatically
RUST_LOG=info cargo run --bin fast_code_search_semantic --features ml-models

# Output:
# INFO Loading ML embedding model
# INFO Downloading ONNX model (~500MB, this may take a while)...
# INFO Model downloaded successfully
# INFO ML embedding model loaded successfully dim=768
```

### Configuration (Future)

Add to `semantic_config.toml`:
```toml
[model]
name = "microsoft/codebert-base"
cache_dir = "~/.cache/fast_code_search_semantic"
use_ml = true  # Set to false to force TF-IDF
max_sequence_length = 512
```

## Testing

### Test Coverage

All tests pass with and without ML feature:

```bash
# Test without ML
cargo test --lib semantic
# Result: 18 tests passed (uses TF-IDF)

# Test with ML (requires model download)
cargo test --lib semantic --features ml-models
# Result: Same tests pass, additional #[ignore] tests for ML
```

### Test Structure

```rust
#[test]
fn test_tfidf_fallback() {
    let model = EmbeddingModel::with_config(false, 512);
    assert!(!model.is_ml());
    assert_eq!(model.embedding_dim(), 128);
}

#[test]
#[ignore]  // Requires model download
#[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
fn test_ml_encode() {
    let model = EmbeddingModel::new();
    if model.is_ml() {
        assert_eq!(model.embedding_dim(), 768);
    }
}
```

## Performance Characteristics

### TF-IDF Mode (Default)
- **Encoding:** <1ms per query
- **Memory:** ~1MB overhead
- **Accuracy:** Basic keyword matching

### ML Mode (with feature flag)
- **Encoding (CPU):** 50-100ms per query
- **Encoding (GPU):** 5-10ms per query (future)
- **Memory:** ~600MB (model + runtime)
- **Accuracy:** Semantic understanding

### Batch Processing
- **TF-IDF:** Linear scaling
- **ML:** 10-20x faster for batches of 32+

## Limitations and Future Work

### Current Limitations

1. **ONNX Runtime Build:**
   - Requires prebuilt binaries or system install
   - Network access needed for first-time setup
   - Not included in default build

2. **CPU-Only:**
   - No GPU acceleration yet
   - Slower inference than GPU

3. **Single Model:**
   - Only CodeBERT supported
   - No model selection UI

### Future Enhancements

1. **GPU Support:**
   - CUDA/ROCm execution providers
   - Batch inference optimization
   - 10-20x speed improvement

2. **Multiple Models:**
   - GraphCodeBERT (better for structure)
   - UniXcoder (multilingual)
   - Custom fine-tuned models

3. **Model Quantization:**
   - INT8 quantized models
   - 4x smaller size
   - 2-3x faster inference
   - Minimal accuracy loss

4. **Configuration:**
   - Model selection in config file
   - Cache directory customization
   - GPU device selection
   - Batch size tuning

5. **Monitoring:**
   - Inference latency metrics
   - Model version tracking
   - Cache hit rates
   - Memory usage stats

## Implementation Checklist

- [x] Add ONNX Runtime and tokenizers dependencies
- [x] Create feature flag for ML models
- [x] Implement model download module
- [x] Implement ONNX-based encoding
- [x] Maintain TF-IDF fallback
- [x] Add conditional compilation
- [x] Test with and without ML feature
- [x] Pass all existing tests
- [x] Pass clippy and fmt checks
- [x] Document architecture
- [ ] Add GPU support (future)
- [ ] Add model configuration (future)
- [ ] Performance benchmarks (future)
- [ ] Update user documentation (future)

## How to Enable ML Models

### Step 1: Install ONNX Runtime (System)

```bash
# Option 1: System package (Ubuntu/Debian)
sudo apt-get install libonnxruntime-dev

# Option 2: Download from GitHub
# https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/releases
```

### Step 2: Build with ML Feature

```bash
cargo build --features ml-models
```

### Step 3: Run and Auto-Download Model

```bash
# Server will download model on first run
cargo run --bin fast_code_search_semantic --features ml-models
```

## Security Considerations

1. **Model Download:**
   - Downloads from huggingface.co
   - TODO: Add SHA256 checksum verification
   - TODO: Support airgapped environments

2. **Model Execution:**
   - ONNX Runtime sandboxing
   - No arbitrary code execution
   - Safe tensor operations

3. **Cache Directory:**
   - User-specific cache location
   - No elevated privileges needed
   - Proper file permissions

## Conclusion

This implementation provides a production-ready foundation for ML-based semantic search:

✅ **Graceful degradation** - Works without ML dependencies
✅ **Automatic setup** - Downloads models on first use
✅ **Clean architecture** - Feature flags and conditional compilation
✅ **Well-tested** - All tests pass in both modes
✅ **Documented** - Comprehensive docs and comments
✅ **Future-proof** - Easy to add GPU support and new models

The system is ready for:
1. Testing with real models (requires ONNX Runtime)
2. User documentation updates
3. Performance benchmarking
4. GPU acceleration (future enhancement)

## References

- [ONNX Runtime Rust bindings](https://github.com/pykeio/ort)
- [HuggingFace Tokenizers](https://github.com/huggingface/tokenizers)
- [Microsoft CodeBERT](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/codebert-base)
- [SEMANTIC_ML_MODEL_PLAN.md](./SEMANTIC_ML_MODEL_PLAN.md)

Commit message:

feat: add optional SHA256 verification for model downloads and enhance symbol rebuilding process

docs/semantic/SEMANTIC_ML_MODEL_IMPLEMENTATION.md, after:

# Semantic Search ML Model - Implementation Summary

## Status: Feature Planned & Infrastructure Complete ✅

This document summarizes the implementation of real ML-based embeddings for semantic code search in fast_code_search.

## What Was Implemented

### 1. Feature-Gated Architecture ✅

The implementation uses Cargo features to make ML models optional:

```toml
[features]
default = []
ml-models = ["ort", "tokenizers"]  # Enable ML model support
```

**Benefits:**
- Works without ML dependencies by default (uses TF-IDF fallback)
- Opt-in ML support via `--features ml-models`
- Graceful degradation when models unavailable

### 2. Model Download Infrastructure ✅

**File:** `src/semantic/model_download.rs` (192 lines)

Implements automatic model download and caching from HuggingFace:

```rust
pub struct ModelDownloader {
    cache_dir: PathBuf,  // ~/.cache/fast_code_search_semantic
}

impl ModelDownloader {
    pub fn ensure_model(&self, model_info: &ModelInfo) -> Result<PathBuf>;
    fn download_model(&self, model_info: &ModelInfo) -> Result<()>;
    fn download_file(&self, url: &str, path: &Path) -> Result<()>;
}
```

**Features:**
- Downloads CodeBERT ONNX model (~500MB)
- Downloads tokenizer and config files
- Caches in user's home directory
- Automatic download on first use
- Optional SHA256 verification via `FCS_MODEL_SHA256` or `FCS_MODEL_SHA256_<MODEL>`

### 3. ML-Based Embeddings with Fallback ✅

**File:** `src/semantic/embeddings.rs` (465 lines)

Implements dual-mode embedding model:

```rust
pub struct EmbeddingModel {
    #[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
    session: Option<Session>,        // ONNX Runtime session
    #[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
    tokenizer: Option<Tokenizer>,    // HuggingFace tokenizer
    embedding_dim: usize,             // 768 for ML, 128 for TF-IDF
    use_ml: bool,                     // True if ML model loaded
}
```

**ML Mode (with feature flag):**
- Uses ONNX Runtime for inference
- CodeBERT-based embeddings (768 dimensions)
- Tokenization with HuggingFace tokenizers
- Mean pooling over token embeddings
- L2 normalization
- Batch processing support

**Fallback Mode (default):**
- Simple TF-IDF-style hashing
- 128-dimensional vectors
- No external dependencies
- Always available

**API:**
```rust
model.encode(text: &str) -> Result<Vec<f32>>
model.encode_batch(texts: &[&str]) -> Result<Vec<Vec<f32>>>
model.is_ml() -> bool
model.embedding_dim() -> usize
```

### 4. Documentation ✅

**Files:**
- `SEMANTIC_ML_MODEL_PLAN.md` - Comprehensive implementation plan
- Code comments and doc strings
- Test coverage for both modes

## Model Selection: Microsoft CodeBERT

**Why CodeBERT:**
- Industry-standard model for code
- Pre-trained on 6 languages
- 768-dim embeddings (BERT standard)
- Available in ONNX format
- Well-documented and tested

**Model Details:**
- Name: `microsoft/codebert-base`
- Size: ~500MB download
- Dimensions: 768
- Max sequence length: 512 tokens

## Technical Architecture

### Conditional Compilation

```rust
#[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
use {
    ort::{Session, GraphOptimizationLevel},
    tokenizers::Tokenizer,
    ndarray::{Array2, Axis},
};

impl EmbeddingModel {
    #[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
    fn encode_ml(&self, text: &str) -> Result<Vec<f32>> {
        // ONNX inference code
    }
    
    fn encode_tfidf(&self, text: &str) -> Result<Vec<f32>> {
        // Fallback code (always available)
    }
}
```

### Graceful Degradation

1. **Try ML model load:**
   ```rust
   match Self::load_ml_model(max_length) {
       Ok((session, tokenizer, dim)) => { /* Use ML */ },
       Err(e) => {
           warn!("Failed to load ML model: {}", e);
           /* Fall back to TF-IDF */
       }
   }
   ```

2. **Feature detection:**
   ```rust
   #[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
   {
       Self::with_config(true, 512)  // Try ML
   }
   #[cfg(not(feature = "ml-models"))]
   {
       Self::with_config(false, 512)  // Use TF-IDF
   }
   ```

## Usage

### Building with ML Support

```bash
# Without ML (default - uses TF-IDF)
cargo build --lib

# With ML support
cargo build --lib --features ml-models

# Build semantic server with ML
cargo build --bin fast_code_search_semantic --features ml-models
```

### Running

```bash
# First run downloads model automatically
RUST_LOG=info cargo run --bin fast_code_search_semantic --features ml-models

# Output:
# INFO Loading ML embedding model
# INFO Downloading ONNX model (~500MB, this may take a while)...
# INFO Model downloaded successfully
# INFO ML embedding model loaded successfully dim=768
```

### Configuration (Future)

Add to `semantic_config.toml`:
```toml
[model]
name = "microsoft/codebert-base"
cache_dir = "~/.cache/fast_code_search_semantic"
use_ml = true  # Set to false to force TF-IDF
max_sequence_length = 512
```

## Testing

### Test Coverage

All tests pass with and without ML feature:

```bash
# Test without ML
cargo test --lib semantic
# Result: 18 tests passed (uses TF-IDF)

# Test with ML (requires model download)
cargo test --lib semantic --features ml-models
# Result: Same tests pass, additional #[ignore] tests for ML
```

### Test Structure

```rust
#[test]
fn test_tfidf_fallback() {
    let model = EmbeddingModel::with_config(false, 512);
    assert!(!model.is_ml());
    assert_eq!(model.embedding_dim(), 128);
}

#[test]
#[ignore]  // Requires model download
#[cfg(feature = "ml-models")]
fn test_ml_encode() {
    let model = EmbeddingModel::new();
    if model.is_ml() {
        assert_eq!(model.embedding_dim(), 768);
    }
}
```

## Performance Characteristics

### TF-IDF Mode (Default)
- **Encoding:** <1ms per query
- **Memory:** ~1MB overhead
- **Accuracy:** Basic keyword matching

### ML Mode (with feature flag)
- **Encoding (CPU):** 50-100ms per query
- **Encoding (GPU):** 5-10ms per query (future)
- **Memory:** ~600MB (model + runtime)
- **Accuracy:** Semantic understanding

### Batch Processing
- **TF-IDF:** Linear scaling
- **ML:** 10-20x faster for batches of 32+

## Limitations and Future Work

### Current Limitations

1. **ONNX Runtime Build:**
   - Requires prebuilt binaries or system install
   - Network access needed for first-time setup
   - Not included in default build

2. **CPU-Only:**
   - No GPU acceleration yet
   - Slower inference than GPU

3. **Single Model:**
   - Only CodeBERT supported
   - No model selection UI

### Future Enhancements

1. **GPU Support:**
   - CUDA/ROCm execution providers
   - Batch inference optimization
   - 10-20x speed improvement

2. **Multiple Models:**
   - GraphCodeBERT (better for structure)
   - UniXcoder (multilingual)
   - Custom fine-tuned models

3. **Model Quantization:**
   - INT8 quantized models
   - 4x smaller size
   - 2-3x faster inference
   - Minimal accuracy loss

4. **Configuration:**
   - Model selection in config file
   - Cache directory customization
   - GPU device selection
   - Batch size tuning

5. **Monitoring:**
   - Inference latency metrics
   - Model version tracking
   - Cache hit rates
   - Memory usage stats

## Implementation Checklist

- [x] Add ONNX Runtime and tokenizers dependencies
- [x] Create feature flag for ML models
- [x] Implement model download module
- [x] Implement ONNX-based encoding
- [x] Maintain TF-IDF fallback
- [x] Add conditional compilation
- [x] Test with and without ML feature
- [x] Pass all existing tests
- [x] Pass clippy and fmt checks
- [x] Document architecture
- [ ] Add GPU support (future)
- [ ] Add model configuration (future)
- [ ] Performance benchmarks (future)
- [ ] Update user documentation (future)

## How to Enable ML Models

### Step 1: Install ONNX Runtime (System)

```bash
# Option 1: System package (Ubuntu/Debian)
sudo apt-get install libonnxruntime-dev

# Option 2: Download from GitHub
# https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime/releases
```

### Step 2: Build with ML Feature

```bash
cargo build --features ml-models
```

### Step 3: Run and Auto-Download Model

```bash
# Server will download model on first run
cargo run --bin fast_code_search_semantic --features ml-models
```

## Security Considerations

1. **Model Download:**
    - Downloads from huggingface.co
    - SHA256 verification supported via `FCS_MODEL_SHA256` or `FCS_MODEL_SHA256_<MODEL>`
    - TODO: Support airgapped environments

2. **Model Execution:**
   - ONNX Runtime sandboxing
   - No arbitrary code execution
   - Safe tensor operations

3. **Cache Directory:**
   - User-specific cache location
   - No elevated privileges needed
   - Proper file permissions

## Conclusion

This implementation provides a production-ready foundation for ML-based semantic search:

✅ **Graceful degradation** - Works without ML dependencies
✅ **Automatic setup** - Downloads models on first use
✅ **Clean architecture** - Feature flags and conditional compilation
✅ **Well-tested** - All tests pass in both modes
✅ **Documented** - Comprehensive docs and comments
✅ **Future-proof** - Easy to add GPU support and new models

The system is ready for:
1. Testing with real models (requires ONNX Runtime)
2. User documentation updates
3. Performance benchmarking
4. GPU acceleration (future enhancement)

## References

- [ONNX Runtime Rust bindings](https://github.com/pykeio/ort)
- [HuggingFace Tokenizers](https://github.com/huggingface/tokenizers)
- [Microsoft CodeBERT](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/codebert-base)
- [SEMANTIC_ML_MODEL_PLAN.md](./SEMANTIC_ML_MODEL_PLAN.md)
